README.md, before:

# DuckSync

DuckSync is a DuckDB extension that provides intelligent query result caching between DuckDB and Snowflake. It uses DuckLake for storage (PostgreSQL catalog + Parquet files) and features transparent query routing, TTL-based expiration, and smart refresh based on source table metadata.

## Features

- **Transparent Query Routing**: Queries automatically route to cached data when available
- **Smart Refresh**: Only refreshes when source tables have changed (checks `last_altered`)
- **TTL Support**: Configurable cache expiration with time-to-live
- **DuckLake Storage**: Uses DuckLake for efficient Parquet-based storage
- **PostgreSQL Catalog**: Metadata stored in DuckLake's PostgreSQL catalog

## Prerequisites

DuckSync automatically installs the required extensions (DuckLake, Snowflake) on first use.

You'll need:
1. **PostgreSQL database** - for DuckLake catalog storage
2. **Snowflake account** - with a configured DuckDB secret
3. **ADBC Snowflake driver** - native library for Snowflake connectivity

### Snowflake Setup

1. Create a DuckDB secret with your Snowflake credentials
2. Install the ADBC Snowflake driver - see [ADBC Driver Setup](https://github.com/iqea-ai/duckdb-snowflake#adbc-driver-setup)

For more details: [Snowflake Extension Docs](https://duckdb.org/community_extensions/extensions/snowflake)

## Installation

```sql
INSTALL ducksync FROM community;
LOAD ducksync;
```

## Quick Start

### Option A: Using Existing DuckLake (Recommended)

If you already have DuckLake attached:

```sql
-- Your existing DuckLake setup
ATTACH 'ducklake:postgres:host=localhost dbname=mydb...' AS my_lake (DATA_PATH '/data');

-- Initialize DuckSync with your existing catalog
SELECT * FROM ducksync_init('my_lake');

-- Register Snowflake source (using your existing secret)
SELECT * FROM ducksync_add_source('prod', 'snowflake', 'my_snowflake_secret');

-- Create a cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_create_cache(
    'sales_summary',
    'prod',
    'SELECT region, SUM(amount) as total FROM sales GROUP BY region',
    ['PROD.PUBLIC.SALES'],
    3600
);

-- Refresh the cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_refresh('sales_summary');

-- Query via ducksync_query (smart routing)
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query('SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.SALES WHERE region = ''US''', 'prod');
```

### Option B: Full Setup (New Users)

If you don't have DuckLake configured yet:

```sql
-- Setup DuckLake + DuckSync in one step
SELECT * FROM ducksync_setup_storage(
    'host=localhost port=5432 dbname=ducklake user=postgres password=secret',
    '/data/ducksync'
);

-- Then continue with add_source, create_cache, etc.
```

## SQL Functions

### `ducksync_init(catalog_name)`

Initialize DuckSync with an existing DuckLake catalog. **Recommended approach.**

**Parameters:**
- `catalog_name`: Name of your attached DuckLake catalog

**Example:**
```sql
SELECT * FROM ducksync_init('my_ducklake');
```

### `ducksync_setup_storage(pg_connection_string, data_path)`

Full setup - attaches DuckLake and initializes DuckSync. Use if you don't have DuckLake configured yet.

**Parameters:**
- `pg_connection_string`: PostgreSQL connection string (libpq format)
- `data_path`: Local path or S3 path for Parquet data files

### `ducksync_add_source(source_name, driver_type, secret_name, [passthrough_enabled])`

Register a Snowflake data source.

**Parameters:**
- `source_name`: Unique identifier for the source
- `driver_type`: Currently only `'snowflake'`
- `secret_name`: Name of existing DuckDB secret with Snowflake credentials
- `passthrough_enabled` (optional): Allow passthrough for uncached tables (default: false)

### `ducksync_create_cache(cache_name, source_name, source_query, monitor_tables, [ttl_seconds])`

Define a cached query result.

**Parameters:**
- `cache_name`: Unique identifier (used in SQL queries)
- `source_name`: Source to execute query against
- `source_query`: SQL query to cache results from
- `monitor_tables`: List of tables to monitor for changes (e.g., `['DB.SCHEMA.TABLE']`)
- `ttl_seconds` (optional): Cache TTL in seconds (NULL = no expiration)

### `ducksync_refresh(cache_name, [force])`

Refresh a cache with smart check logic.

**Parameters:**
- `cache_name`: Cache to refresh
- `force` (optional): Skip smart check and force refresh (default: false)

**Returns:**
- `result`: SKIPPED, REFRESHED, or ERROR
- `message`: Status message
- `rows_refreshed`: Number of rows (if refreshed)
- `duration_ms`: Refresh duration in milliseconds

### `ducksync_query(sql_query, source_name)`

**The main query interface.** Executes queries with smart routing - returns actual data (not status messages).

**Parameters:**
- `sql_query`: SQL query to execute (use Snowflake table names)
- `source_name`: Source to use for execution

**Routing Logic:**
1. Parses SQL using DuckDB's parser to extract all table references
2. Checks if each table is cached (by cache name or monitored table)
3. **All tables cached** → Rewrites query to use local DuckLake tables
4. **Any table not cached** → Passes entire query to Snowflake

**Examples:**
```sql
-- Cache hit via monitored table name → executes locally
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.CUSTOMERS WHERE region = ''US''',
    'prod'
);

-- Cache hit via named query (use cache_name directly)
-- Useful for complex queries cached under a friendly name
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM customers_cache LIMIT 10',
    'prod'
);

-- Table NOT cached → passthrough to Snowflake
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.RAW_ORDERS LIMIT 100',
    'prod'
);

-- JOIN with mixed tables (1 cached, 1 not) → passthrough to Snowflake
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT c.*, o.total FROM CUSTOMERS c JOIN ORDERS o ON c.id = o.customer_id',
    'prod'
);

-- Complex aggregation from cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT region, COUNT(*) as cnt FROM PROD.PUBLIC.CUSTOMERS GROUP BY region',
    'prod'
);
```

**Named Queries:** You can query by cache name directly (e.g., `customers_cache`) instead of the Snowflake table name. This is useful for caching complex joins or aggregations under a friendly name that doesn't exist as a table in Snowflake.

**Best Practice:** Create caches with `monitor_tables` matching your Snowflake table names for automatic routing.

### Direct DuckLake Access

Cached data is stored in standard DuckLake tables. Query them directly with normal DuckDB SQL:

```sql
-- Create and refresh a cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_create_cache('customers', 'prod', 'SELECT * FROM CUSTOMERS', ['CUSTOMERS'], 3600);
SELECT * FROM ducksync_refresh('customers');

-- Query the DuckLake table directly (standard DuckDB - no magic)
SELECT * FROM ducksync.prod.customers;
SELECT * FROM ducksync.prod.customers WHERE region = 'US';

-- Join with local tables
SELECT c.*, l.segment 
FROM ducksync.prod.customers c 
JOIN local_segments l ON c.id = l.customer_id;
```

**Path format:** `{catalog}.{source_name}.{cache_name}` (e.g., `ducksync.prod.customers`)

**When to use each approach:**

| Method | Use When |
|--------|----------|
| `ducksync_query()` | Smart routing with TTL checks and auto-refresh |
| Direct DuckLake | Fast queries, no TTL checks, joining with local data |

## Smart Refresh Logic

DuckSync uses a "smart check" approach to minimize unnecessary data transfers:

1. **TTL Check**: If `expires_at < now()`, trigger refresh
2. **Metadata Check**: Query `information_schema.tables` for `last_altered` timestamps
3. **Hash Comparison**: Compare hash of current metadata vs stored `source_state_hash`
4. **Skip if Match**: If hashes match and TTL not expired, skip refresh
5. **Refresh if Changed**: Execute query, write to DuckLake, update state

This approach means:
- Zero Snowflake compute cost when data hasn't changed
- Sub-second metadata checks vs full query execution
- Automatic refresh when source tables are modified

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     DuckSync Extension                       │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  ducksync_query()    MetadataManager      StorageManager     │
│  (smart routing)     (DuckLake tables)    (DuckLake)         │
│         │                  │                   │             │
│         ▼                  ▼                   ▼             │
│  ┌──────────┐       ┌───────────┐       ┌───────────┐       │
│  │ TTL +    │       │ ducksync. │       │ DuckLake  │       │
│  │ Routing  │◄─────►│ sources   │       │ Parquet   │       │
│  └──────────┘       │ caches    │       │ Files     │       │
│         │           │ state     │       └───────────┘       │
│         │           └───────────┘              ▲             │
│         │                 │                    │             │
│         │          PostgreSQL Catalog ─────────┘             │
│  ┌──────▼───────────────────────────────────────┐           │
│  │            RefreshOrchestrator               │           │
│  │  • TTL check + auto-refresh                  │           │
│  │  • Source metadata query (snowflake_query)   │           │
│  │  • State hash comparison                     │           │
│  │  • Query execution & storage                 │           │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────┘           │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
              ┌───────────────────────┐
              │  Snowflake Extension  │
              │  (snowflake_query)    │
              └───────────────────────┘
```

## Testing

### Prerequisites

- Docker (for PostgreSQL)
- DuckDB v1.4.2+
- ADBC Snowflake driver (for Snowflake integration tests)

### Run Tests

```bash
# Build and run integration tests
make test

# Reset test environment (clean slate)
make reset-test

# Or manually:
cd test && docker compose up -d postgres
./test/run_tests.sh

# Cleanup
make test-docker-down    # Stop PostgreSQL
make clean-test-data     # Remove local test files
make clean-all           # Full cleanup (Docker + data + build)
```

For Snowflake integration tests, see [test/README.md](test/README.md).

## Building from Source

```bash
# Clone with submodules
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/danjsiegel/ducksync.git
cd ducksync

# Build
make release

# Run
./build/release/duckdb
```

## Dependencies

- **DuckDB v1.4.2+**
- **DuckLake extension** - auto-installed ([docs](https://ducklake.select/docs/))
- **Snowflake extension** - auto-installed ([docs](https://duckdb.org/community_extensions/extensions/snowflake))

## Limitations

- **Snowflake-only**: No support for other data sources yet
- **Manual monitor_tables**: Tables to monitor must be explicitly specified
- **No partial routing**: Entire query uses cache or passthrough, not mixed

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Improve table reference rewriting using AST
Refactors table reference rewriting in queries to use AST-based modification instead of string replacement, ensuring safer and more robust query rewriting. Adds helper functions for building and matching fully qualified table names, and updates the known limitations in the README for clarity.

README.md, after:

# DuckSync

DuckSync is a DuckDB extension that provides intelligent query result caching between DuckDB and Snowflake. It uses DuckLake for storage (PostgreSQL catalog + Parquet files) and features transparent query routing, TTL-based expiration, and smart refresh based on source table metadata.

## Features

- **Transparent Query Routing**: Queries automatically route to cached data when available
- **Smart Refresh**: Only refreshes when source tables have changed (checks `last_altered`)
- **TTL Support**: Configurable cache expiration with time-to-live
- **DuckLake Storage**: Uses DuckLake for efficient Parquet-based storage
- **PostgreSQL Catalog**: Metadata stored in DuckLake's PostgreSQL catalog

## Prerequisites

DuckSync automatically installs the required extensions (DuckLake, Snowflake) on first use.

You'll need:
1. **PostgreSQL database** - for DuckLake catalog storage
2. **Snowflake account** - with a configured DuckDB secret
3. **ADBC Snowflake driver** - native library for Snowflake connectivity

### Snowflake Setup

1. Create a DuckDB secret with your Snowflake credentials
2. Install the ADBC Snowflake driver - see [ADBC Driver Setup](https://github.com/iqea-ai/duckdb-snowflake#adbc-driver-setup)

For more details: [Snowflake Extension Docs](https://duckdb.org/community_extensions/extensions/snowflake)

## Installation

```sql
INSTALL ducksync FROM community;
LOAD ducksync;
```

## Quick Start

### Option A: Using Existing DuckLake (Recommended)

If you already have DuckLake attached:

```sql
-- Your existing DuckLake setup
ATTACH 'ducklake:postgres:host=localhost dbname=mydb...' AS my_lake (DATA_PATH '/data');

-- Initialize DuckSync with your existing catalog
SELECT * FROM ducksync_init('my_lake');

-- Register Snowflake source (using your existing secret)
SELECT * FROM ducksync_add_source('prod', 'snowflake', 'my_snowflake_secret');

-- Create a cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_create_cache(
    'sales_summary',
    'prod',
    'SELECT region, SUM(amount) as total FROM sales GROUP BY region',
    ['PROD.PUBLIC.SALES'],
    3600
);

-- Refresh the cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_refresh('sales_summary');

-- Query via ducksync_query (smart routing)
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query('SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.SALES WHERE region = ''US''', 'prod');
```

### Option B: Full Setup (New Users)

If you don't have DuckLake configured yet:

```sql
-- Setup DuckLake + DuckSync in one step
SELECT * FROM ducksync_setup_storage(
    'host=localhost port=5432 dbname=ducklake user=postgres password=secret',
    '/data/ducksync'
);

-- Then continue with add_source, create_cache, etc.
```

## SQL Functions

### `ducksync_init(catalog_name)`

Initialize DuckSync with an existing DuckLake catalog. **Recommended approach.**

**Parameters:**
- `catalog_name`: Name of your attached DuckLake catalog

**Example:**
```sql
SELECT * FROM ducksync_init('my_ducklake');
```

### `ducksync_setup_storage(pg_connection_string, data_path)`

Full setup - attaches DuckLake and initializes DuckSync. Use if you don't have DuckLake configured yet.

**Parameters:**
- `pg_connection_string`: PostgreSQL connection string (libpq format)
- `data_path`: Local path or S3 path for Parquet data files

### `ducksync_add_source(source_name, driver_type, secret_name, [passthrough_enabled])`

Register a Snowflake data source.

**Parameters:**
- `source_name`: Unique identifier for the source
- `driver_type`: Currently only `'snowflake'`
- `secret_name`: Name of existing DuckDB secret with Snowflake credentials
- `passthrough_enabled` (optional): Allow passthrough for uncached tables (default: false)

### `ducksync_create_cache(cache_name, source_name, source_query, monitor_tables, [ttl_seconds])`

Define a cached query result.

**Parameters:**
- `cache_name`: Unique identifier (used in SQL queries)
- `source_name`: Source to execute query against
- `source_query`: SQL query to cache results from
- `monitor_tables`: List of tables to monitor for changes (e.g., `['DB.SCHEMA.TABLE']`)
- `ttl_seconds` (optional): Cache TTL in seconds (NULL = no expiration)

### `ducksync_refresh(cache_name, [force])`

Refresh a cache with smart check logic.

**Parameters:**
- `cache_name`: Cache to refresh
- `force` (optional): Skip smart check and force refresh (default: false)

**Returns:**
- `result`: SKIPPED, REFRESHED, or ERROR
- `message`: Status message
- `rows_refreshed`: Number of rows (if refreshed)
- `duration_ms`: Refresh duration in milliseconds

### `ducksync_query(sql_query, source_name)`

**The main query interface.** Executes queries with smart routing - returns actual data (not status messages).

**Parameters:**
- `sql_query`: SQL query to execute (use Snowflake table names)
- `source_name`: Source to use for execution

**Routing Logic:**
1. Parses SQL using DuckDB's parser to extract all table references
2. Checks if each table is cached (by cache name or monitored table)
3. **All tables cached** → Rewrites query to use local DuckLake tables
4. **Any table not cached** → Passes entire query to Snowflake

**Examples:**
```sql
-- Cache hit via monitored table name → executes locally
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.CUSTOMERS WHERE region = ''US''',
    'prod'
);

-- Cache hit via named query (use cache_name directly)
-- Useful for complex queries cached under a friendly name
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM customers_cache LIMIT 10',
    'prod'
);

-- Table NOT cached → passthrough to Snowflake
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT * FROM PROD.PUBLIC.RAW_ORDERS LIMIT 100',
    'prod'
);

-- JOIN with mixed tables (1 cached, 1 not) → passthrough to Snowflake
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT c.*, o.total FROM CUSTOMERS c JOIN ORDERS o ON c.id = o.customer_id',
    'prod'
);

-- Complex aggregation from cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_query(
    'SELECT region, COUNT(*) as cnt FROM PROD.PUBLIC.CUSTOMERS GROUP BY region',
    'prod'
);
```

**Named Queries:** You can query by cache name directly (e.g., `customers_cache`) instead of the Snowflake table name. This is useful for caching complex joins or aggregations under a friendly name that doesn't exist as a table in Snowflake.

**Best Practice:** Create caches with `monitor_tables` matching your Snowflake table names for automatic routing.

### Direct DuckLake Access

Cached data is stored in standard DuckLake tables. Query them directly with normal DuckDB SQL:

```sql
-- Create and refresh a cache
SELECT * FROM ducksync_create_cache('customers', 'prod', 'SELECT * FROM CUSTOMERS', ['CUSTOMERS'], 3600);
SELECT * FROM ducksync_refresh('customers');

-- Query the DuckLake table directly (standard DuckDB - no magic)
SELECT * FROM ducksync.prod.customers;
SELECT * FROM ducksync.prod.customers WHERE region = 'US';

-- Join with local tables
SELECT c.*, l.segment 
FROM ducksync.prod.customers c 
JOIN local_segments l ON c.id = l.customer_id;
```

**Path format:** `{catalog}.{source_name}.{cache_name}` (e.g., `ducksync.prod.customers`)

**When to use each approach:**

| Method | Use When |
|--------|----------|
| `ducksync_query()` | Smart routing with TTL checks and auto-refresh |
| Direct DuckLake | Fast queries, no TTL checks, joining with local data |

## Smart Refresh Logic

DuckSync uses a "smart check" approach to minimize unnecessary data transfers:

1. **TTL Check**: If `expires_at < now()`, trigger refresh
2. **Metadata Check**: Query `information_schema.tables` for `last_altered` timestamps
3. **Hash Comparison**: Compare hash of current metadata vs stored `source_state_hash`
4. **Skip if Match**: If hashes match and TTL not expired, skip refresh
5. **Refresh if Changed**: Execute query, write to DuckLake, update state

This approach means:
- Zero Snowflake compute cost when data hasn't changed
- Sub-second metadata checks vs full query execution
- Automatic refresh when source tables are modified

## Architecture

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                     DuckSync Extension                       │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  ducksync_query()    MetadataManager      StorageManager     │
│  (smart routing)     (DuckLake tables)    (DuckLake)         │
│         │                  │                   │             │
│         ▼                  ▼                   ▼             │
│  ┌──────────┐       ┌───────────┐       ┌───────────┐       │
│  │ TTL +    │       │ ducksync. │       │ DuckLake  │       │
│  │ Routing  │◄─────►│ sources   │       │ Parquet   │       │
│  └──────────┘       │ caches    │       │ Files     │       │
│         │           │ state     │       └───────────┘       │
│         │           └───────────┘              ▲             │
│         │                 │                    │             │
│         │          PostgreSQL Catalog ─────────┘             │
│  ┌──────▼───────────────────────────────────────┐           │
│  │            RefreshOrchestrator               │           │
│  │  • TTL check + auto-refresh                  │           │
│  │  • Source metadata query (snowflake_query)   │           │
│  │  • State hash comparison                     │           │
│  │  • Query execution & storage                 │           │
│  └──────────────────────────────────────────────┘           │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                           │
                           ▼
              ┌───────────────────────┐
              │  Snowflake Extension  │
              │  (snowflake_query)    │
              └───────────────────────┘
```

## Testing

### Prerequisites

- Docker (for PostgreSQL)
- DuckDB v1.4.2+
- ADBC Snowflake driver (for Snowflake integration tests)

### Run Tests

```bash
# Build and run integration tests
make test

# Reset test environment (clean slate)
make reset-test

# Or manually:
cd test && docker compose up -d postgres
./test/run_tests.sh

# Cleanup
make test-docker-down    # Stop PostgreSQL
make clean-test-data     # Remove local test files
make clean-all           # Full cleanup (Docker + data + build)
```

For Snowflake integration tests, see [test/README.md](test/README.md).

## Building from Source

```bash
# Clone with submodules
git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/danjsiegel/ducksync.git
cd ducksync

# Build
make release

# Run
./build/release/duckdb
```

## Dependencies

- **DuckDB v1.4.2+**
- **DuckLake extension** - auto-installed ([docs](https://ducklake.select/docs/))
- **Snowflake extension** - auto-installed ([docs](https://duckdb.org/community_extensions/extensions/snowflake))

## Known Limitations

- **Snowflake-only**: Currently only supports Snowflake as a data source
- **Manual monitor_tables**: Tables to monitor for changes must be explicitly specified when creating a cache
- **All-or-nothing routing**: If a query references multiple tables and any one is not cached, the entire query passes through to Snowflake
- **SELECT only**: Query rewriting only handles SELECT statements; DDL and DML pass through unchanged
- **No prepared statement caching**: Internal metadata queries use string concatenation (safe for internal use, but prepared statements would be more robust)

## License

MIT License - see LICENSE file for details.
